---
layout: distill
title: On Canonicalization in Geometric Deep Learning
date: 2025-05-25
description: Equivariant neural networks are powerful tools for machine learning tasks involving data with inherent symmetries. Their power stems from their ability to encode known transformations directly into their architecture, providing a strong inductive bias, especially in domains like physics, chemistry, and computer vision. This blog post delves into recent research addressing some of the key challenges that arise when applying these models.
tags: distill formatting

authors:
  - name: Changmin Kang
    # url: "https://sites.google.com/view/sungsooahn0215/home"
    affiliations:
      name: KAIST

bibliography: 2025-05-25-20244091.bib

# Optionally, you can add a table of contents to your post.
# NOTES:
#   - make sure that TOC names match the actual section names
#     for hyperlinks within the post to work correctly.
#   - we may want to automate TOC generation in the future using
#     jekyll-toc plugin (https://github.com/toshimaru/jekyll-toc).
toc:
  - name: A quick cover on invariance and equivariance
  - name: Achieving in(equi)variance from existing models
  - name: Limitation of CAN
  - name: Other recent works
  - name: Conclusion

---

Invariant and equivariant neural networks have become a crucial tool in machine learning, particularly for tasks where data exhibits inherent *symmetries*. These symmetries, such as rotations or permutations, are mathematical transformations that leave certain properties of the data unchanged. By incorporating these symmetries into the network architecture, the enhanced models offer improved generalization, enhanced data efficiency, and greater interpretability. However, the development of such networks is not without its challenges.

We will delve into recent research that addresses some of the key challenges in the field of invariant/equivariant networks and how they are tackled. In particular, we will see how invariance/equivariance could be achieved for existing architectures via 'averaging', rather than by designing new architectures from the scratch. Then, we will see what are the shortcomings of the proposed 'averaging' methods and how they are recently revised.

## A quick cover on invariance and equivariance

In the field of geometric deep learning, the main focus is to design or obtain a network architecture that properly reflects the geometry, or the symmetries within the dataset. Such symmetries typically originate from the structure of the domain underlying the input signals. For instance, consider the image dataset (refer to the following figure by <d-cite key="bronstein2021geometric"></d-cite>). The domain $\Omega$ is a $n$-by-$n$ grid, where $n$ is an integer, and the space of signals $\mathcal{X}(\Omega)$ consists of the signals $x: \Omega \to \mathbb{R}^3$.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm-3 mt-3 mt-md-0">
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm-6 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/2025-05-25-20244091/DomSig.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm-3 mt-3 mt-md-0">
    </div>
</div>

Assume that the machine learning system operates on signals on some domain $\Omega$, where the space of the signals $\mathcal{X}(\Omega)$ is a Hilbert space, that is, a linear combination and inner product among the signals are available.

<br>

Notice that the collection of symmetries satisfies a number of properties: a composition of two symmetries is again a symmetry, and its inverse, which always exists, is also a symmetry. These properties naturally define a group that consists of the symmetries. Formally, a *group* $G$ is a set equipped with a binary operation <d-footnote>For brevity and following the common notation, we juxtapose the first argument with the second. </d-footnote> $*:G\times G \to G$ satisfying the following axioms:

$$
\begin{gather*}
    \text{Associativity}: (g_1g_2)g_3 = g_1(g_2g_3),\quad \forall g_1, g_2, g_3 \in G.\\
    \text{Identity Element}: \exists e\in G \;\;\text{s.t.}\;\; eg = g = ge,\quad \forall g\in G.\\
    \text{Inverse Element}: \forall g\in G, \exists g^{-1}\in G \;\;\text{s.t.}\;\; gg^{-1} = e = g^{-1}g.
\end{gather*}
$$

For later use, we define the *orbit* of $x\in\mathcal{X}$, denoted as $G\cdotp x = \lbrace gx:g\in G\rbrace$. The collection of all orbits are denoted as $\mathcal{X}/G$.

<br>

The gist of the introduction of groups $(G,\*)$ of symmetry is to study how the group acts on the data. We will first define how the group acts on the domain $\Omega$. The action of the group on the signal space $\mathcal{X}(\Omega)$ would then be naturally obtained. A group $G$ acts on $\Omega$ by the (left) *group action* $\cdot : G\times\Omega \to \Omega$ that satisfies

$$
\begin{gather*}
    \text{Compatibility}: (g_1g_2)\cdot\omega = g_1\cdot(g_2\cdot \omega),\quad \forall g_1, g_2 \in G, \omega\in\Omega.\\
    \text{Identity Element}: e_G\cdot\omega = \omega,\quad \forall \omega\in\Omega.
\end{gather*}
$$

An action of $G$ on $\mathcal{X}(\Omega)$ is naturally obtained from that on $\Omega$:

$$
\begin{equation*}
    (g.x)(\omega) \triangleq x\left(g^{-1}\cdot\omega\right).
\end{equation*}
$$

As we assumed that the signal space is a Hilbert space, we can represent the action of each symmetry by some (invertible) matrix. Given some vector space $V$, a *group representation* is a map $\rho: G \to \mathrm{GL}(V)$ that assigns each group element to an invertible matrix and satisfies $\rho(gh) = \rho(g)\rho(h)$, for all $g, h \in G$.

<br>

Now we can define the invariance and the equivariance of a function. A function $f:\mathcal{X}(\Omega) \to \mathcal{Y}$ is $G$**-invariant** if, for all $g \in G, x\in\mathcal{X}$,

$$
f(\rho(g)x) = f(x).
$$

Similarly, a function $f:\mathcal{X}(\Omega) \to \mathcal{X}(\Omega')$ is $G$**-equivariant** if, for all $g \in G, x\in\mathcal{X}$,

$$
f(\rho_1(g)x) = \rho_2(g)f(x),
$$

where $G$ is assumed to act both on $\mathcal{X}(\Omega)$ and $\mathcal{X}(\Omega')$, $\rho_1$ and $\rho_2$ are the group representation of $\mathcal{X}(\Omega)$ and $\mathcal{X}(\Omega')$, respectively. In words, a function is $G$-invariant if its output remains intact whatever the symmetry in $G$ acted on the input. On the other hand, a function is $G$-equivariant if its output is modified accordingly to the acted symmetry on the input.

---

## Achieving in/equivariance from existing models: Frame Averaging

Given some model, or function $\phi:\mathcal{X} \to \mathcal{X}'$ and some symmetry group $G$ which acts both on the domain and the codomain, what are the ways to make them in/equivariant? The simplest way is to take the *average* of the function over the entire group, that is,

$$
\psi_\textrm{GA}(X) \triangleq \frac{1}{|G|}\sum_{g\in G}\rho_2(g)\phi(\rho_1(g)^{-1}X).
$$

This method is called **group averaging** (GA). It is a straightforward exercise to show that $\psi_\textrm{GA}$ is $G$-equivariant. Moreover, notice that omitting $\rho_2(g)$, or taking the group representation of the output space as the trival one, results in a $G$-invariant function for $\phi: \mathcal{X} \to \mathbb{R}$. Henceforth, we shall omit formulas for invariance for brevity (unless distinctions are required).

The critical problem of GA is that if the order of $G$ were extremely large (e.g., permutation group) or even infinite (e.g., Euclidean group) then the computation of GA would be intractable. As a solution, <d-cite key="puny2022frame"></d-cite> proposed **frame averaging** (FA): instead of averaging over entire group $G$, do it over a carefully selected subset of $G$, namely the frame $\mathcal{F}: \mathcal{X} \to 2^\mathcal{G}\setminus\varnothing$ (see below equation and figure).

$$
\lbrack \phi \rbrack_\mathcal{F}(X) \triangleq \frac{1}{|\mathcal{F}(X)|}\sum_{g\in \mathcal{F}(X)}\rho_2(g)\phi(\rho_1(g)^{-1}X).
$$

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/2025-05-25-20244091/FrameEqVar.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

It is shown that if $\mathcal{F}$ is a $G$-equivariant frame, or if $\mathcal{F}\left(\rho_1(g)X\right) = g\mathcal{F}(X) = \lbrace gh: h\in\mathcal{F}(X)\rbrace$ holds, then $\lbrack \phi \rbrack_\mathcal{F}$ is $G$-equivariant—if $\rho_2$ is trivial, then $\lbrack \phi \rbrack_\mathcal{F}$ is $G$-invariant (Theorem 1 of <d-cite key="puny2022frame"></d-cite>). Moreover, FA can provably impose additional symmetry (Theorem 2 of <d-cite key="puny2022frame"></d-cite>): if $\phi$ is $H$-equivariant(invariant) and $\mathcal{F}$ is $H$-invariant and $G$-equivariant, then $\lbrack \phi \rbrack_\mathcal{F}$ is $H\times G$-equivariant(invariant). <d-footnote> In addition, the group action by $G$ and $H$ should commute in input (and output) space. </d-footnote> FA also maintains the expressive power of backbone models if the frame is bounded in terms of the operator norm (Theorem 4 of <d-cite key="puny2022frame"></d-cite>).

Despite of all these features, nothing can be presumed about the cardinality of the frame itself. One example aligning with FA is the Euclidean motions $E_d$ acting on point cloud networks. Defining the frame based on the Principle Component Analysis (PCA), the size of the frame is $2^d$, which amounts to 8 when $d=3$. However, it could be possible that the frame is smaller than the entire group $G$ but still be too large for computing the average. To achieve equivariance in symmetry groups $S_n$ acting on graph dataset with $n$ vertices, it is shown that $\vert\mathcal{F}(X)\vert \geq \vert\mathrm{Aut}(S_n)\vert = \vert S_n\vert$ that scales in order $n!$, so FA is inapplicable. <d-footnote> There is an efficient approximation if invariance were to be achieved by random sampling under uniform distribution. Interested readers may refer to Theorem 3 and Corollary 1 of <d-cite key="puny2022frame"></d-cite>. </d-footnote>

Below we show one experimental result of FA. The task is the normal estimation, or to estimate normal data from an input point cloud $\mathbb{R}^{n\times 3}$. The main backbone model is PointNet <d-cite key="qi2017pointnet"></d-cite> and DGCNN <d-cite key="wang2019dynamic"></d-cite>, which are popular and universal permutation equivariant 3D point cloud architectures. The experiment ran on three settings: i) $I/I$ - training and testing on the original data; ii) $I/SO(3)$ - training on the original data and testing on randomly rotated data; and iii) $SO(3)/SO(3)$ - training and testing with randomly rotated data. The ABC dataset <d-cite key="koch2019abc"></d-cite> that contains 3 collections (10k, 50k, and 100k models each) of Computer-Aided Design (CAD) models is employed for the experiment.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/2025-05-25-20244091/FA_pointcloud_table.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

The quality of the normal estimation is $1-(n^\top\hat{n})^2$, with $n$ being the ground truth normal and $\hat{n}$ the normal prediction. FA incorporates the $E(3)$ symmetry as previously mentioned, resulting FA-PointNet/DGCNN models listed, which are also universal $E(3)\times S_n$ equivariant model. Another baseline of comparsion is vector neurons (VN-) <d-cite key="deng2021vector"></d-cite>, a framework for creating $SO(3)$-equivariant neural networks for pointcloud processing. Incorporating FA to existing architectures is beneficial in scenarios (ii-iii), outperforming augmentation by a large margin. In contrast to VN models, FA models maintain, or even improve the baseline estimation quality (i), attributed to the expressive power of the FA models.

---

## Average over a single element: Canonicalization

FA can shrink the burden of GA but could still require numerous function calls. Instead of FA, one may consider canonicalization <d-cite key="kaba2023equivariance"></d-cite> to achieve in/equivariance by a single pass, or 'averaging' over a single symmetry.

Let us first try to understand the intuition of canonicalization (CN) through the lens of a simple example: recognizing a handwritten digit '7' regardless of its rotation. A standard non-equivariant classifier would need to learn to recognize '7' in every possible orientation, which is inefficient and requires extensive data augmentation (viewpoint-independent). An equivariant model, on the other hand, is designed such that if it recognizes a '7' in one orientation, it can easily recognize it in any other orientation (multiple-view). CN (single-view-plus-transformation) approach offers a different path: if we can find a consistent way to transform any rotated '7' into a standard, upright '7', then a simple, another model trained only on upright '7's would suffice (and, if needed, rotate '7' in the output space accordingly).

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm-4 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/2025-05-25-20244091/CN_view.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

In the framework of CN, a model is learned with a prediction function $f:\mathcal{X} \to \mathcal{X}'$ and a canonicalization (CN) function $h:\mathcal{X} \to \rho_1(G)$. The model $\phi$ in canonicalized form is 

$$
\phi(x) \triangleq h'(x)f\left( h(x)^{-1} x \right),
$$

where $h'=\rho_2\left( \rho_1^{-1}(h(x)) \right)$ is the counterpart of $h$ on the output. <d-footnote> As long as $\rho$ is faithful, one can make $\rho$ be bijective by a restriction of its codomain. </d-footnote> It is straightforward to show that $\phi$ is $G$-equivariant for *any* $f$ if $h$ is $G$-equivariant. <d-footnote> For invariance, simply omit $h'(x)$. </d-footnote> Hence, if $f$ can do the heavy-lifting part, $h$ need not to be an expressive, complex model as long as it is equivariant. This condition is further relaxed if $G$ has a normal subgroup $K$. Formally (Theorem 3.2 of <d-cite key="kaba2023equivariance"></d-cite>)
for $G \simeq J\ltimes K $, if $f$ is $K$-equivariant and $h$ is $J$-equivariant, $K$-invariant, and its image is $\rho_1(J)$ then $\phi$ is $G$-equivariant. Consider an instance of rotation CN with a CNN. Without Theorem 3.2, CN function $h$ should output an element of the Euclidean group transforming equivariantly under rotations of the input. But, as CNN is translation equivariant and translation group is a normal subgroup of Euclidean group, $h$ can now simply return a rotation.

One can moreover claim the universal approximation of CN, as FA did. If $f$ is a universal approximator of $K$-equivariant functions and $h$ (and $h'$) are continuous, the model $\phi$ in its CN form is a universal approximator of $G$-equivariant functions (Theorem 3.3 of <d-cite key="kaba2023equivariance"></d-cite>). This statement shall be revisited later.

<br>

The next step of CN is to obtain such $h$ encompassing equivariance. The first approach is to directly choose any existing equivariant neural network architecture with the output being a group element. For permutation groups and Lie groups (which includes Euclidean group), an equivariant multilayer perceptron <d-cite key="finzi2021practical"></d-cite> could be selected. Another approach is to find take $h$ as the minimizer of some energy function $E$. Formally,

$$
h(x) \in \arg\min E\left(\rho_1(g)^{-1}x\right),
$$

where ties in symmetries are randomly broken. Intuitively, $E$ represents a distance between the input and the canonical sample of the orbit and is therefore minimized when $\rho_1(g)$ is the transformation that maps to the canonical sample.<d-footnote> Frankly speaking, $h(x)$ is a minimizer of a function $s$ that satisfies some equivariance-like condition between $g$ and $x$ and its minimum value should be equal in each orbit. The formulation $EE\left(\rho_1(g)^{-1}x\right)$ naturally meets the first condition, but the second condition is not formally proved. According to the authors, however, the second condition can be met almost surely for neural networks under weak assumption <d-cite key="cox2020almost"></d-cite>. Curious readers may look at Section 4 and Appendix B of <d-cite key="kaba2023equivariance"></d-cite>. </d-footnote> For instance, in image classification, the images are transformed into point clouds then fed to Deep Sets <d-cite key="zaheer2017deep"></d-cite> to be returned as the energy. The mapping $E$ is optimized by gradient descent (using implicit differentiation).

We introduce $N$-body dynamics experiment regarding CN. <d-footnote> This experiment is also shown in <d-cite key="puny2022frame"></d-cite>, but not demonstrated in the post. Rather than explaining each and every compared models in the table below, besides FA-GNN, we ask readers to refer to <d-cite key="puny2022frame"></d-cite>. </d-footnote> In this task, the model has to predict the future positions of $N=5$ charged particles interacting with Coulomb force given initial positions and velocities <d-cite key="satorras2021n"></d-cite>.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm-4 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/2025-05-25-20244091/CN_Nbody_table.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

The metric reported is the Mean Squared Error between predicted locations and ground truth. The prediction function $f$ is a 4-layer GNN <d-footnote> with same hyperparameters as <d-cite key="puny2022frame"></d-cite>. The CN function is a simple 2-layer Vector Neurons version <d-cite key="deng2021vector"></d-cite> of the Deep Sets, which has 20 times fewer parameters than $f$ has. Despite $h$ being simple, CN-GNN, trained end-to-end, improves the performance compared to the baseline and FA-GNN. There are two variants of CN-GNN. The first one is CN-GNN-$O(3)$, where CN is only learned for the $O(3)$ part of the transformation; the translation part is given by the centroid. As choosing the center of mass as the origin of the reference frame is natural, the performance is expected to be and is, in fact, marginally degraded. The second variant is CN-GNN (frozen), where $h$ is not learned. Although the model is still equivariant with respect to Euclidean group, it shows smaller loss than the baseline.

Though CN seems practical

---

## Limitation of CN: Weighted FA

asdf

---

## Other recent works

hjkl

---

## Conclusion

qwerty
